I DATA
&
KNOWLEDGE
ENGINEERING
ELSEVIER

Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

From decision tables to expert system shells
J. Vanthienen*, G. Wets
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Department of Applied Economic Sciences, Naamsestraat 69, B-3000 Leuven,
Belgium
Received 19 January 1993; revised manuscript received 15 October 1993; accepted 7 July 1994
Abstract

Building and maintaining high quality knowledge based systems is not a trivial task. Decision tables have
sometimes been recommended in this process, mainly in verification and validation. In this paper, however, it is
shown how decision tables can also be used to generate, and not just to validate, knowledge bases and how the
transformation process from decision tables to knowledge bases can be organized. Several options to generate rules
or other knowledge representations from decision tables are described and evaluated.
The proposed generation strategy enables the knowledge engineer to concentrate on the acquisition and
modeling issues and allows him to isolate the knowledge body from its implementation. The generation process has
been implemented for two commercial tools, AionDS and KBMS and has been applied to real world applications.

Keywords: Expert systems; Decision tables; Decision trees; Knowledge acquisition; Verification & validation; Rule
minimization

O. Introduction
While decision tables were originally used as a technique to support programming, in the
mid-80s the A.I.-community started to show some interest in them because of their ability to
detect incompleteness and inconsistency. Since then they have occasionally been applied
mainly in verification and validation of knowledge based systems. In the 90s, decision tables
have been recommended as a fast way of executing the expert system and also some initial
efforts were made to use decision tables in the knowledge acquisition phase. In this paper, it
will b e i n d i c a t e d h o w k n o w l e d g e c a n b e m o d e l e d a n d v e r i f i e d using d e c i s i o n t a b l e s a n d h o w
t h e s e d e c i s i o n t a b l e s c a n b e t r a n s f o r m e d into a k n o w l e d g e b a s e d a p p l i c a t i o n w i t h p r o p e r
c o n s u l t a t i o n facilities.
In S e c t i o n 1, t h e d e c i s i o n t a b l e r e p r e s e n t a t i o n a n d t h e c u r r e n t use o f d e c i s i o n t a b l e s in t h e

* Corresponding author. Email: jan.vanthienen@econ.kuleuven.ac.be
0169-023X/94/$07.00 t~ 1994 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved
SSDI: 0 1 6 9 - 0 2 3 X ( 9 4 ) 0 0 0 2 0 - 4

266

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

context of knowledge based systems are briefly described. In Section 2, it is proposed how the
use of decision tables in the different domains of knowledge based systems can be integrated.
Section 3 deals with the modeling issues of the integrated approach including verification and
validation. Section 4 analyzes how the decision tables can be transformed for use in an expert
system shell. In Section 5, this transformation is elaborated for a specific tool, AionDS.
Section 6 briefly covers some applications. In Section 7, the proposed approach is evaluated.
Finally our major findings are summarized.

1. Decision tables and Knowledge Based Systems
"A decision table is a table, representing the exhaustive set of mutual exclusive conditional
expressions, within a predefined problem area." [31]
The tabular representation of the decision situation is characterized by the separation between
conditions and actions, on one hand, and between subjects and conditional expressions
(states), on the other hand. Every table column (decision column) indicates which actions
should (or should not) be executed for a specific combination of condition states. In this
definition, the decision table concept is deliberately restricted to the so called single-hit table,
where columns are mutually exclusive. Only this type of table allows easy checking for
consistency and completeness.
If each column only contains simple states (no contractions or irrelevant conditions), the
table is called an expanded decision table, in the other case the table is called a contracted
decision table. The translation from one form to the other is defined as expansion and
contraction respectively.
In Fig. 1 an example of an expanded decision table is given.
Decision tables and knowledge based systems show some striking similarities, although both
approaches put strongly different emphases. Moreover, a lot of expert systems built nowadays
are propositional expert systems, which are equivalent to decision tables [1]. While decision
tables traditionally stress the representation facilities (with the resulting additional checking
capabilities for completeness, consistency and correctness), knowledge based systems are

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Fig. 1. Expanded table. Note: The decision table concept in this paper is by no means restricted to limited-entry
tables. Only, this example happens to consist of limited entries.

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

267

mainly dealing with knowledge formulation (modularity, flexibility) and consultation (inference, user friendliness).
Currently, in the context of knowledge based systems, there are three domains where
decision tables are encountered: mainly during the verification and validation process, but also
as a fast way of executing the expert system and during the knowledge acquisition phase.
1.1. Verification and validation using decision tables
Knowledge acquisition is one of the main problems in building knowledge based systems,
and usually, after the knowledge acquisition process is finished, a lot of contradictions and
insufficiencies remain to be detected and solved. Also, maintaining the knowledge base is not
a trivial task which often introduces unnoticed inconsistencies or contradictions. Therefore
verification and validation of knowledge based systems are receiving increased attention [4, 5,
8, 15, 16, 23].
The emerging problems of validation and verification have led to the occasional use of
schemes, tables or similar techniques in knowledge representation and validation. It has been
reported earlier [3, 17, 24], that, in a vast majority of cases, the decision table technique is
able to provide for extensive validation and verification assistance. Most of the common
verification and validation problems (consistency and correctness of knowledge, non-redundancy of knowledge, completeness of knowledge [13]) can easily be solved using decision
tables [25].
1.2. Using decision tables for fast execution
As already mentioned, a large class of current expert systems are propositional systems,
equivalent to decision tables. In [1], such expert systems are transformed into decision tables,
because execution of decision tables proved to be much faster than execution of the original
expert system. This execution efficiency can even be optimized further as indicated in the
section on optimization.
1.3. Acquiring knowledge using decision tables
Decision tables offer more than validation and verification or a fast execution mechanism.
Instead of building or generating decision tables only during the validation and verification
process, they have also significant advantages in the knowledge acquisition phase itself, in
which all the information has to be transformed into a coherent substance [12]. In the
knowledge acquisition stage, knowledge will be modeled in a series of decision tables, as
already indicated in [25] (see also [19]).

2. An integrated approach
In this paper, it is argued that there is no need to restrict the usage to the transformation
from expert system to decision tables, in order to obtain smooth validation or execution

268

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

Prologa

KBMS

g
e

Table-file~-- n
e
r
a
Explanationl
,t
file
[7'
o
r__

AionDS

Soare
le

Spare
Table
Decision
Centre

:ision
itre
isultation
lager

Consultation
Manager

Fig. 2. AionDS and KBMS generation facility.

efficiency. In our point of view it is clearly superior to model the knowledge by means of
decision tables from the start (including validation & verification), and then to implement the
system ( i n a n optimized way), e.g. using an expert system shell. In other words, the path from
decision tables to knowledge based systems is as relevant as the reverse direction.
• Decision table construction, verification and validation are briefly discussed in Section 3.
• When the decision tables are transformed for use in an expert system shell, this can be done
using if-then-else statements or by using rules, as will be indicated in Section 4.
It is important to notice that after this transformation process, a mapping between the decision
tables and the expert system will always remain. Changes will be made to the decision table(s)
and a new generation step will update the system accordingly. Because of this generation step,
the application can easily be transported to other tools or platforms.
The generation process has been implemented for two commercial tools, AionDS and
KBMS from Trinzic Corporation (Fig. 2). AionDS is an object oriented, knowledge based
development environment to build complex business policies and procedures. KBMS is a
similar tool, with emphasis on ease and speed of development (e.g. providing a natural
language for data access).

3. Knowledge acquisition and verification & validation
3. I. Modeling with decision tables
In this phase, a set of decision tables will be built modeling the domain knowledge. These
tables constitute a hierarchy, as each condition or action in a decision table might be
elaborated in a lower condition or action subtable respectively.
A number of manual methods for the construction of decision tables exist. Choosing an
appropriate method will simplify the construction process and will increase both its efficiency
and effectiveness. Depending on the characteristics of the problem domain, several methods
can be distinguished [31], dealing with comparable stages when analyzing the problem. The

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

269

main difference between them is the order in which these stages are treated and the way they
are worked out. The following stages can be distinguished:
(1) obtain conditions, condition states and actions of the decision situation;
(2) specify the problem in terms of decision rules;
(3) fill the decision table based on the rules;
(4) check for completeness, correctness and contradictions;
(5) simplify the decision table and display it.
Building decision tables manually can be a cumbersome process, therefore the PROLOGA
(PROcedural LOGic Analyzer) system, an interactive rule-based design tool for computersupported construction and manipulation of decision tables [24-26] was built. This decision
table engineering workbench incorporates powerful rule based knowledge acquisition and
representation, table based verification, and adequate consultation interfaces to common
shells and languages.
In Prologa, the construction process largely follows the same steps as described in the
manual construction method. When building decision tables, the designer essentially provides
the system with a list of conditions with their states, a list of actions and a list of relations
between condition states and actions (in the form of logical expressions or rules). Based on
these rules the decision table will be constructed.
To express the relations between condition states and actions, a powerful specification
language is provided. Designing the procedural decision situation requires a specification
language which closely matches natural language and its nuances. A decision situation usually
does not consist of a collection of independent descriptions, but contains several levels of
structure, e.g. general rules, exceptions, . . . . Logical expressions can therefore be assigned
different levels of significance, in the sense that certain expressions (general rules) can be
overruled by later specifications (exceptions), or that a (definite) expression can not be
neutralized.

3.2. Integrated verification and validation
One of the major advantages of the integrated decision table approach is that checking for
completeness and consistency can already be performed during the design of the knowledge
based system. At the moment validation and verification of knowledge bases commonly take
place after the construction process. It is a clearly better solution to detect errors as soon as
possible. Because the application is generated from the decision tables, knowledge maintenance largely means table maintenance and the application can easily be transported to other
tools or platforms.
Integrated verification & validation using some form of decision tables has also been
adopted to integrate the rule sets of multiple experts in the knowledge acquisition phase [14].

4. Transformation framework

After the knowledge has been modeled using decision tables, including proper verification
and validation, they need to be implemented e.g. using an expert system shell. This
transformation consists of three steps. First the different optimizations which can be applied

270

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

1

2

3

4

5

6

Fig. 3. Table contraction.

will be described. Then the transformation from optimized decision tables to expert system
shells will be explained. Finally the consultation environment is added.
4.1. Optimizations used in the transformation

In the remainder of this section the simple decision table of Fig. 1 will be used as a starting
point. The following optimizations can be performed starting from this expanded decision
table:
• Table contraction: minimizing the number of columns for a given condition order (e.g. first
test the condition Absence < = 5, then the condition Seniority > = 10 and, finally, the
condition Evaluation), by combining columns which lead to the same action configuration
(Fig. 3) [24];
• R o w order optimization: determination of the condition order which results in the minimum
number of columns. For a table with k conditions, this implies a choice between k!
alternative condition orders, some of which might be impossible because of precedence
constraints. E.g., the table in Fig. 3 with 6 columns is optimized in Fig. 4. Now it only
shows 4 columns because condition 3 is examined first.
To enhance the effectiveness of the decision table in the user interface of a decision making
system [22] or to facilitate decision making [32], table contraction and row order
optimization are important.

123

Fig. 4. Row order optimization.

4

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

271

• Execution time optimization: depending on the purpose of the decision table, it might be
transformed into optimal test sequences, taking into account the test time for each
condition and column frequencies. For each column one has to specify how frequently this
column is expected to occur. This figure can be obtained using statistical analysis.
In decision table research, a lot of effort has been spent on generating this optimal tree [7],
[10], [20], [30]. For a table with k limited entry conditions, this implies a choice between
/'/;=1 J 2(k-j) decision trees.
In this optimal solution, it is possible that conditions are not always tested in the same
order. As a consequence it will, in general, not be possible to present the optimal solution
as a decision table, therefore the optimal solution will be presented as an unbalanced tree,
meaning that conditions are not always examined in the same order.
For the decision table of Fig. 3 (assuming equal column frequencies and equal condition
test times), the optimal execution tree is displayed in Fig. 5. In this (exceptional) case, the
tree is a balanced tree, meaning that the conditions are always examined in the same order.
Note that generating the optimal tree may suffer from some major drawbacks and
difficulties:
(1) How to determine testing costs of conditions?
(2) How to determine column frequencies?
(3) The performance of the conversion algorithm.
If testing costs and column frequencies are not available, they are supposed to be equal. In
that case, execution time optimization minimizes the average number of questions needed
to make a decision.
• Minimization of expressions governing the same action:
This optimization tries to determine a minimal expression for each action. This kind of
optimization can be useful when we want to reconstruct a specification based on actions
(e.g. when rewriting legal texts).
A lot of research has already been performed in this area especially in the field of switching
circuits. In this section, a short overview of the techniques we use will be given.
In the 1950s, the starting years of digital design, logical gates were expensive. It was
therefore necessary to produce, for a certain logic circuit, an equivalent circuit but with less
electronic components. At that time simplifications of logic functions became a hot topic.
First Karnaugh developed a pictorial method to obtain minimum logic functions. A similar
c3
I

¢~

/2

I

c~I

~3

P1
P3

Fig. 5. Optimal execution tree.

272

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

method was developed by Veitch. These methods where convenient for problems up to 6
variables. Later on, more sophisticated methods where developed by Quine and McCluskey: the Quine-McCluskey method and the consensus method [11]. These methods involve
two major steps:
First, all prime implicants are generated. Let A be a logical expression. A fundamental
conjunction ~Ois said to be a prime implicant of A if q, logically implies A while any other
fundamental conjunction obtained by eliminating literals from q, does not logically imply A.
A statement X logically implies a statement Y if and only if every assignment of truth
values making X true also makes Y true.
The second step extracts a minimum prime cover. This is defined as a sum of product terms
which has a minimum number of terms and of all those which have the same number of
terms has a minimum number of assertions.
These methods were only practical for small problems (max. 10 variables). To solve more
realistic problems, heuristics were developed. Two approaches can be distinguished here.
One approach generates all prime applicants, like the Quine-McCluskey method, but
instead of generating a minimum cover a nearly minimum cover is generated heuristically.
A second approach tries to simultaneously identify and select implicants for the cover.
While originally research about this subject was conducted in the field of micro-electronics,
in the '70s, also the decision table community started to show some interest in this problem.
In decision tables, reduction of rules governing the same action was investigated when
minimizing a decision grid chart. The decision grid chart is a special kind of multiple hit
table, in which the rules are grouped by action.
Strunz [21] applied the Quine-McCluskey algorithm to obtain a minimum decision grid
chart to facilitate conversion into a contracted decision table. Applying this means that first
a full expansion of the decision grid chart is necessary (containing no dashes as entries). To
avoid this problem, Maes [9] used the consensus method instead of the Quine-McCluskey
method to find the prime implicants.
In our approach, research now focuses on the transformation from decision tables to
minimal expressions, instead of the decision table construction process. This research on
optimization of expressions governing the same action, for the above example, yields the
following minimal expressions:
cl = y ^ c3 = pos--> pl
c3 = neg--> p2

((cl = y ^ c2 = y) v cl = n) ^ c3 = pos--> p3
4.2. From decision tables to expert system shells

When designing or generating an application for an existing knowledge based tool,
conditions, condition states, conclusions and table references have to be transformed to the
available modeling facilities. This transition will not be considered here, as it is rather specific
to the target environment. See Section 5 for a transition to AionDS.
After this transition, the main problem is how to implement the decision logic. The
implementation of the decision logic can be realized in two different ways, depending on the

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

!

Y
c~

c1
I

43

I

I

273

I

I

POSNeg Pos Neg
P3
Fig. 6. D e c i s i o n t r e e o f t h e c o n t r a c t e d

table.

problem characteristics. Firstly it is possible to convert the decision tables to a decision tree or
to code using a nested if-then-else structure. The second way of implementing the decision
tables is to convert them to a set of rules. Of course, a combination of both can sometimes be
useful.
4.2.1. Conversion o f decision tables to a decision tree or to code

Knowledge can sometimes be transformed into a tree structure. The table might be
transformed into a nested if-then-else structure, where the outcome of the decision is obtained
by repeatedly choosing the appropriate branch in the selection. The decision logic can also be
represented as a tree structure for pictorial reasons.
Within this option, several types of trees might be the result of the conversion: balanced
trees (where conditions, if they are relevant in the tree, are always examined in the same
order) and unbalanced trees (where the order in which conditions are evaluated might differ
between different branches). It will be clear that unbalanced trees offer more flexibility, but
constitute a more complex optimization challenge. The different kinds of optimizations were
treated more formally in Section 4.1.
(1) A naive balanced tree
This is the most straightforward way to transform a decision table into a tree. In this case,
the (contracted) decision table is simply transformed into a tree from left to right, each
column giving rise to a new leaf of the tree. The decision table in Fig. 3 will then be
transformed to the following balanced tree (Fig. 6). Note that the condition C2 is irrelevant in
the right branch.
The corresponding if-then-else structure is shown in Fig. 7
if ci = y
then if c2 = y
then if c3 =pos
then pl

p3
else p2
else

274

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

if c3 = pos
then pl
else p2
else
if c3 = pos
then p3
else p2
Fig. 7. If-then-else structure of the contracted table.

(2) A minimal node (balanced) tree
This tree is similar, but has been optimized with respect to the number of leafs. This means
that the minimal node tree is the tree resulting from the table with the minimum number of
columns, selected from all feasible condition orderings. In this tree, conditions are still always
examined in the same order, but the order might be different from that of the original decision
table. This structure corresponds with the decision table in Fig. 4 and is displayed in Fig. 8:
C3

I
~eg

~os
I

c~I
Y ~

;3

I

I

Pl
P3

I

P1

Fig. 8. Minimal node tree.

The if-then-else structure of this tree is shown in Fig. 9.
if c3 = pos
then if cl = y
then if c2 = y
then p l

p3
else p l
else p3
else p2
Fig. 9. Minimal node conversion.

(3) Optimal unbalanced tree
This is the result of the execution time optimization from 4.1. In this exceptional case, the
optimal unbalanced tree happens to be the same as the minimal node balanced tree (Fig. 8)
and therefore this figure will not be repeated.

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

275

4.2.2. Conversion of decision tables to a set of rules
In a lot of cases, conversion to a decision tree is not flexible e n o u g h to deal with the
k n o w l e d g e in the k n o w l e d g e base. It will sometimes be necessary to allow the user to supply
an u n k n o w n value to a question. This might be the case w h e n a user cannot answer a question
or simply b e c a u s e he does not want to answer a particular question. W h e n a tree is used as
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n mechanism, one might run into problems because if u n k n o w n values are
allowed, the user will be stuck in the tree. T h e r e f o r e when using trees, u n k n o w n values are
not allowed. A n o t h e r p r o b l e m of trees is that they cannot handle multiple answers to a
question. A third p r o b l e m of trees occurs w h e n the k n o w l e d g e in the tree has to be linked
with o t h e r parts of the knowledge base. This p r o b l e m occurs because trees act like a black
box. If certain p a r a m e t e r s are known, trees give an o u t c o m e , but the w a y they reach this
o u t c o m e is fixed. It cannot be influenced by the inference engine.
Several alternatives to transform the decision table into a set of rules are available:

(1) Entry (x) based translation
This translation derives one rule for each x in the table. Walking through the decision table
t o p d o w n , from left to right, the contracted table of Fig. 3 will then be t r a n s f o r m e d to the
following 7 rules (figure 10):
cl = y ^ c2 = y A C3 =y---~pl
cl = y A C2 = y ^ C3 = y--~ p3
cl = y ^ C2 = y ^ C3 = n---~ p2
cl = y ^ c2 = n A C3 = y---~ p l
cl = y A C2 = n A C3 = n---~ p2
cl = n ^ c3 = y---~ p3
cl = n ^ c3 = n ~ p 2
Fig. 10. Entry based translation.

This m e t h o d leads to several rules with the same premise, but different conclusions, if m o r e
then o n e action has to be p e r f o r m e d for a certain combination of attributes. A l t h o u g h this
usually results in a decrease in p e r f o r m a n c e , it might be useful to divide the k n o w l e d g e base in
e l e m e n t a r y chunks of knowledge.
(2) Column (case) based translation
This translation generates one rule for each column of the decision table. T h e following
rules (Fig. 11) can be d e d u c e d from the decision table in Fig. 4.
c3 = pos ^ c2 = y ^ cl = y---~ p l ^ p3
c3 = pos A C2 = n ^ cl = y---~ p l
c3 = pos ^ cl = n---~ p3
c3 = neg ~ p2
Fig. 11. Column based translation.

276

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

T h e optimizations in Section 4.1 (table contraction and row o r d e r optimization) can be used
as a basis for rule generation. As each leaf in the decision tree will be r e p r e s e n t e d by a single
rule, minimizing the n u m b e r of leaves will decrease the n u m b e r of rules.
(3) Row (action) based translation
This translation generates one rule for each relevant action (or n o n - e m p t y row). As a
starting point for this translation, we can take the rules obtained by entry based translation or
by c o l u m n based translation. These rules are g r o u p e d by action. Finally rules for the same
action have to be combined. In this example (Fig. 12), the optimization of the rules governing
the same action can be readily deduced. In m o r e difficult examples, however, optimization
algorithms will be used to obtain the optimal rule set (Section 4.1). Minimization of
expressions governing the same action.
W h e n applying this m e t h o d , the n u m b e r of rules is usually very low, but the left h a n d side
of the rules tends to be complex. Note that this specification corresponds well to the
k n o w l e d g e acquisition stage, as it describes the entire application field of a conclusion or an
action. Rewriting specifications, therefore, is a typical application area.
cl = y A C2 = y A C3 = pos---~ p l
cl = y A C2 = n A C3 = pos---~ p l
c l = y A e3 = pos---~ p l
cl = y A C2 = y A C3 = neg---~ p2
cl = y A C2 = n A C3 = neg---~ p2
cl = n A C3 = neg---~ p2
e3 = neg ~

p2

cl = y A C2 = y A C3 = pos---~ p3
cl = n A C3 = pos---~ p3
( ( e l = y A C2 = y ) V e l = n) A C3 = pos---> p 3
Fig. 12. Row based translation.

4.3. Consultation environment
T h e consultation e n v i r o n m e n t offers the necessary user and system interfaces to p r o d u c e a
working application. Its implementation will d e p e n d on the tool used, but is not problemspecific.
T h e following d e m a n d s will have to be met by the consultation environment:
• T h e consultation e n v i r o n m e n t has to be as i n d e p e n d e n t as possible from the decision tables.
T h e r e f o r e the e n v i r o n m e n t can be built in a generic way and according to specific user
interface standards.
• A t any m o m e n t , a list of questions and supplied answers can be shown with the ability to
change previous answers and restart the reasoning process from the specified point ( W H A T
IF simulations).
• Maintaining the knowledge base must be easy. It should, for instance, be possible to plug in
an u p d a t e d decision table without having to generate the complete application again.

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994)265-282

277

• At any moment, it must be possible to leave the application (saving the current contents of
the consultation) and restart it later. This also enables to store a list of prototype cases
which can be adapted using the selective change facility.
• Prompt and help texts should be available for conditions, condition states and actions, to
explain the meaning of questions and conclusions.
• The user interface must allow easy communication with the user, e.g. using multiple
windows, mouse support, etc.
The hierarchy of decision tables, which were transformed in decision trees or rules (see
previous section), is translated into a question and answer interface. The user, however, need
not be aware of the existence of the decision tables or any relations between them. In
translating the hierarchy, attention must be paid that no circular inferencing arises, that
recursive table calls remain possible and that condition subtable results are properly assigned
to the calling conditions.

5. An example: The transformation Prologa-AionDS
The above transformation process has been implemented in the decision table engineering
workbench PROLOGA (PROcedural LOGic Analyzer, [25]). An interface [6] was built
between P~OLO6A and AionDS. This enables the knowledge engineer to model and validate
the knowledge in the form of decision tables and generate a complete consultation application
in AionDS. An interface between Prologa and KBMS is described in [2].
5.1. K n o w l e d g e structure
5.1.1. Available source elements

When transforming the decision tables, the following information is available:
• Names of conditions, condition states and actions. References to subtables are indicated in
the condition or action names.
• The (contracted) decision tables on a column by column basis, where every column
indicates a combination of conditions with the resulting action configuration.
• Every table can also be provided with an explanation file containing prompts, help texts o r
other information specific to the consultation. The explanation file is basically independent
from the decision logic, such that the decision table can be altered without having to update
the help information.
AionDS, being object oriented, uses the concept of classes consisting of a set of objects which
have attributes called slots and methods containing functions and procedures. An AionDS
application is a hierarchy of states. A state contains an agenda and rules. An agenda, which
directs the inference engine, defines high level instructions. It is possible in the agenda to call
other states.

278

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

5.1.2. Generation of a decision centre
Each decision table is converted to a class and condition and action variables are converted
to slots, which may be linked to other conditions or actions. The decision table logic is
converted to if-then-else code as a function in a class. All subtables in a hierarchy are
generated and linked automatically.
In this implementation, decision tables are transformed to if-then-else code. Depending on
the problems characteristics, it could be preferable to transform the decision tables to rules
(cf. supra). The implementation of these rules in an expert system shell is straightforward, but
it triggers other common problems of rule based implementation (e.g. when is a breath first
search appropriate?).
5.2. Implementation of the knowledge structure
The interface offers three related generation options: a decision centre, the consultation
manager and the spare table option.
5.2.1. Decision centre
This option only generates the basic knowledge structure: a class with the converted actions,
condition variables and decision table logic. No additional consultation facilities are provided.
This option can be used if consultation options are offered by the expert system shell itself or
if a own specific environment will be used.
5.2.2. The consultation manager
A full consultation environment is built together with the decision table application. This
includes the following facilities:
• View: a list of all variables with their values.
• Footsteps: a chronological survey of the questions asked, with the answer and the
conclusions reached by the expert system.
• Whatlf-mode and Reconsider: offers the possibility in Footsteps or View to change one or
more answers and restart the reasoning process.
5.2.3. Spare table
This option enables the designer to plug in the decision logic of an updated table into an
existing application, without having to repeat the entire generation process. The rest of the
application remains intact.
6. Applications

We have used decision tables in a large number of applications and environments. Some
examples of the more common areas of experience include:
• modeling and verification of complex managerial decision situations in general;
• calculation of rates and premiums in banks and insurance companies;
• verification and visualization of legal procedures;
• help desk applications;

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

279

The use of decision tables in legal procedures is illustrated in the Handipak system [18], a
knowledge based system with regard to financial benefits for the disabled in Belgium. Its main
goal is to support first line social workers when helping the disabled with the introduction of
their applications for benefits.
HANDIPAK is an operational system, developed by Infosoc (research group on information systems and social security, Institute of Social Law, K.U. Leuven) using the
decision table workbench Prologa. The first version of this system was developed in 1987 by
order of the former State Secretary for the Disabled, at a time when Belgium was drawing up
a new regulation with regard to the financial benefits for the disabled. In 1991 a new and more
comprehensive version was elaborated using AionDS. The analysis of the proposed regulation
by means of the decision table technique enabled the authors to eliminate a considerable
number of ambiguities in the bill before it was published. The development of the system thus
increased the internal coherence of the proposed regulation.
HANDIPAK helps to accurately complete the applications by guiding the user through the
relevant regulations; it also gives an idea of what probably will be the outcome of the demand.
Concretely, HANDIPAK is a kind of question-answer game that gives a personalized and
motivated conclusion based on the answers given. HANDIPAK comprises an extensive on-line
textbook and context-sensitive help screens. Answers can be altered at any time, which
permits 'what-if'-simulations.
The knowledge base of the HANDIPAK advisory system was developed by using the
Prologa tool. The relevant law was couched in 45 mutually related decision tables. The
relations between the different tables were specified in a number of control tables. First the
regulation to be represented was split up into a number of regulatory subunits dealing with the
same subject. The regulation with regard to financial benefits for the disabled was divided into
subunits, that respectively concern: the validity of the application; the applicability with regard
to nationality, age, and residence; the granting conditions with regard to category or other
social benefits; the calculation of the maximal benefit and the revenues to be deduced; the
modalities of the payment. For each of the regulatory subunits, one or more mutually related
decision tables were developed using Prologa.

7. Evaluation of the proposed approach
According to numerous experiences, the ability of decision tables to represent complex
decision situations with easy checking for completeness and consistency, makes it a very
inviting technique. Besides these classical arguments for the use of decision tables in
knowledge based systems, a number of less known advantages have been revealed by these
applications:
- Decision tables act as a bridge between modular and partial decision rule specifications (as in
expert systems) and efficient condition oriented execution (as in classical programs). They
offer a uniform technique for the whole lifecycle of a decision system, going from the
specification phase down to the implementation and maintenance phase, and this for a
variety of application areas (management, law, procedures . . . . );

280

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

- Even when the knowledge engineer has very limited knowledge of the problem domain (e.g.
in medical or legal applications), as an interviewer he is able to ask relevant questions,
compare patterns, come up with exceptions, etc., because decision tables easily allow the
designers to focus on specific situations (columns) and therefore act as a good medium of
communication when negotiating, discussing or checking a complex decision situation. As
decision tables can be used in two directions: data-driven (determining which actions to
undertake in a given situation), and goal directed (specifying under which conditions an
action should be undertaken), wild discussions about exceptions, criteria, cases are
immediately brought down to a surveyable representation.
- B e c a u s e the decision logic is represented by the table structure, translation from one
language to another is easy and only implies translating some terms, not complex logical
formulations. In multilingual communities (e.g. the EEC), this constitutes a large advantage.
Although the proposed approach has a lot of advantages the methodology can still be refined:
- F i r s t and foremost, modeling the time dependence of decisions within decision tables is
rather difficult. Decision tables are very appropriate to represent argumentations which lead
to punctual decisions, but are less suited to represent decision making processes regarding
evolutive data. However, this kind of processes frequently occurs. Legal decisions, e.g.,
often take into account values or regulations at a given moment or during a given period in
the past.
- M o r e o v e r , decision tables are most suited for the representation of decision making
processes using selections. It is more difficult (and not appropriate) to represent iterative
and, in some way, sequential structures in this manner. This implies that decision tables are
particularly useful for domains where most of the knowledge takes the form of conditional
expressions.
- It would also be useful to support the decision of spreading the knowledge to be represented
over different decision tables. Presently, the decision to create subtables is based upon
certain rules of thumb or on the experience of the knowledge engineer. It is obvious that this
practical and implicit knowledge can form the basis for a more systematical approach, which
is subject of current research [28].
- T h e proposed approach only deals with deterministic knowledge. Topics for future research
include how the methodology can be extended to non-deterministic knowledge.

8.

Conclusion

In this paper it has been shown that decision tables offer more than verification and
validation. A transformation framework was developed to incorporate the decision tables in
expert system shells. This transformation framework was first explained theoretically. The
different optimizations which can be applied, the different ways of implementing the
knowledge structure and the consultation environment were described. It was shown how this
transformation framework could be implemented for the specific expert system shell AionDS.
Finally the proposed approach was evaluated based on experiences while developing
applications. It was concluded that, although some refinements are possible, there is a large
class of applications where the proposed approach can be successfully adopted.

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

281

Acknowledgements
T h e authors wish to t h a n k M. Verhelst for his c o m m e n t s on an earlier version of this paper.
T h e y also greatly acknowledge the invaluable assistance of S. Jans, P. M e r l e v e d e , and G. Van
H u m b e e c k . This research was conducted in the context of L I R I S ( L e u v e n Institute for
R e s e a r c h on I n f o r m a t i o n Systems).

References
[1] R. Colomb and C. Chung, Very fast decision table execution of propositional expert systems, Proc. A A A I 9 0
(1990) 671-676.
[2] B. Coucke, Ontwikketing van een interface Prologa-KBMS (Knowledge Base Management System),
K.U.Leuven TEW dissertation, 1992.
[3] B. Cragun and H. Steudel, A decision-table based processor for checking completeness and consistency in
rule-based expert systems, Int. J. of Man-Machine Studies 5 (1987) 633-648.
[4] D. Hamilton, K. Kelley and C. Culbert, State-of-the-practice in knowledge-based system verification and
validation, Expert Systems with Applications 4 (1991) 403-410.
[5] T. Hoppe and P. Meseguer, VVT terminology: A proposal, IEEE Expert 3 (1993), 48-55.
[6] S. Jans, Een interface tussen Prologa en AionDS, Toepassing van de beslissingstabellenbenadering bij het
ontwerp en de implementatie van een kennissysteem, K.U.Leuven TEW dissertation, 1992.
[7] A. Lew, Optimal conversion of extended-entry decision tables with general cost criteria, Comm. A C M 4
(1978) 269-279.
[8] D. Loveland and M. Valtorta, Detecting ambiguity: An example in knowledge evaluation, in: Proc. Eighth Int.
Joint Conf. on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 1, Karlsruhe (Aug. 1983), 182-184.
[9] R. Maes, On minimizing decision grid charts, Angewandte Informatik 9 (1982) 451-456.
[10] A. Martelli and U. Montanari, Optimizing decision trees through heuristically guided search, Comm. A C M 12
(1978) 1025-1039.
[11] E. J. McCluskey, Introduction to the Theory of Switching Circuits (Mc.Graw-Hill, New York, 1965).
[12] E Merlevede and J. Vanthienen, A structured approach to formalization and validation of knowledge, in Proc
I E E E / A C M Int. Con. on Developing and Managing Expert System Programs, Washington, DC (1991),
149-158.
[13] T. Nguyen, W. Perkins, T. Laffey and D. Pecora, Knowledge base verification, A I Mag. 2 (1987) 69-75.
[14] O. K. Ngwenyama and N. Bryson, A formal method for analyzing and integrating the rule-sets of multiple
experts, Informat. Sys. 1 (1992) 1-16.
[15] H. Nonfjall and H. Larsen, Detection of potential inconsistencies in knowledge bases, Int. J. Intelligent Sys. 7
(1992) 81-96.
[16] T. O'Leary and M. Goul et al., Validating expert systems, IEEE Expert 3 (1990) 51-58.
[17] S. Puuronen, A tabular rule checking method, in: Proc. Avignon87, Vol. 1 (1987) 257-268.
[18] F. Robben, HANDIPAK: computeradviessysteem m.b.t, de financi61e tegemoetkomingen aan gehandicapten,
in B. Van Buggenhout, F. Robben, I. Leus, H. Casteleyn, G. Hertecant, W. en Demeester, Her Nieuw
Gehandicaptenrecht. Commentaar bij de Nieuwe Wetgeving en Recente Evoluties in het Beleid, Recht en Sociale
Hulpverlening (Brugge, Die Keure, 1988) 21-26.
[19] L. Santos-Gomez and M. Darnell, Empirical evaluation of decision tables for constructing and comprehending
expert system rules, Knowledge Acquisition 4 (1992) 427-444.
[20] I. Sethi and B. Chatterjee, Conversion of decision tables to efficient sequential testing procedures, Comm.
A C M 5 (1980) 279-285.
[21] H. Strunz, Grundlagen und Anwendingsm6glichkeiten der Entscheidungs-tabellentechnik bei der Gestaltung
rechnergestiintzter Informationsysteme, University of K61n, 1975.

282

J. Vanthienen, G. Wets / Data & Knowledge Engineering 13 (1994) 265-282

[22] G.H. Subramanian and J. Nosek et al., A comparison of the decision table and tree, Comm. A C M 1 (1992)
89-94.
[23] M. Suwa, A. Scott and E. Shortliffe, Completeness and consistency in a rule-based system, in: Buchanan &
Shortliffe 159-170.
[24] J. Vanthienen, Automatiseringsaspecten van de specificatie, constructie en manipulatie van beslissingstabellen,
K.U.Leuven Dept. Applied Econ. Doctoral Dissertation, 1986.
[25] J. Vanthienen, Knowledge acquisition and validation using a decision table engineering workbench, The World
Congress on Expert Systems (Pergamon Press, Orlando, FL 1991), 1861-1868.
[26] J. Vanthienen and E. Dries, Illustration of a decision table tool for specifying and implementing knowledge
based systems, Proc. Fifth Int. Conf. on Tools with Artificial Intelligence (TAI), Boston, M A (1993) 198-205.
[27] J. Vanthienen and F. Robben, Developing legal knowledge based systems using decision tables, Proc. Fourth
Int. Conf. on A.I. and Law, Amsterdam (1993) 282-291.
[28] J. Vanthienen and M. Snoeck, Knowledge factoring using normalisation theory, Int. Symp. on the Management
of Industrial and Corporate Knowledge (ISMICK'93) Compi~gne (1993).
[29] J. Var~thienen and G. Wets, Building intelligent systems for management applications using decision tables,
Proc. Fifth Annual Conf. on Intelligent Systems in Accounting, Finance and Management, Stanford (1993) 16
PP.
[30] M. Verhelst, The conversion of limited-entry decision tables to optimal and near-optimal flowcharts: Two new
algorithms, Comm. A C M 11 (1972) 974-980.
[31] M. Verhelst, De Praktijk van BeslissingstabeUen (Kluwer, Deventer/Antwerpen, 1980).
[32] I. Vessey and R. Weber, Structured tools and conditional logic: An empirical investigation, Comm. A C M 1
(1986) 48-57.
Jan Vanthienen is associate professor

of information systems at K.U.
Leuven, Department of Applied
Economic Sciences. His main research areas are knowledge based
systems and expert systems, decision
tables, information systems analysis
and design. He is a founding member
of: Leuven Institute for Research in
Information Systems (LIRIS), and
Interfaculty Center for Law and Informatics (ICRI), both of K.U.
Leuven.

Geert Wets is research assistant at

K.U. Leuven, Department of Applied Economic Sciences, focusing on
the area of decision tables and expert
systems. He received a BSc of commercial engineer, major informatics
at K.U. Leuven in 1991.

